docs: add troubleshooting control plane documentation (#3275)
talos-systems/talos: website/content/docs/v0.9/Guides/troubleshooting-control-plane.md

---
title: "Troubleshooting Control Plane"
description: "Troubleshoot control plane failures for running cluster and bootstrap process."
---

This guide is written as series of topics and detailed answers for each topic.
It starts with basics of control plane and goes into Talos specifics.

This document mostly applies only to Talos 0.9 control plane based on static pods.
If Talos was upgraded from version 0.8, it might be still running self-hosted control plane, current status can
be checked with the command `talosctl get bootstrapstatus`:

```bash
$ talosctl -n IP get bs
NODE         NAMESPACE   TYPE              ID              VERSION   SELF HOSTED
172.20.0.2   runtime     BootstrapStatus   control-plane   1         false
```

In this guide we assume that Talos client config is available and Talos API access is available.

> Kubernetes client configuration can be pulled from control plane nodes with `talosctl -n IP kubeconfig`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes client configuration can be pulled from control plane nodes with `talosctl -n <IP> kubeconfig`
```

(this command works before Kubernetes is fully booted).

> ### What is a control plane node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### What is a control plane node?
```

Reviewer: Feels like all of these headers should have question marks after them.

Author: our linter doesn't allow punctuation in headers, but I could suppress the warning, I like with `?` better

Reviewer: Well, maybe not all of them, but the ones that are written as questions.

Talos nodes which have `.machine.type` of `init` and `controlplane` are control plane nodes.

The only difference between `init` and `controlplane` nodes is that `init` node automatically

> bootstraps single-node `etcd` cluster on a first boot if etcd data directory empty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bootstraps a single-node `etcd` cluster on a first boot if the etcd data directory is empty.
```

> Node with type `init` can be replaced with `controlplane` node which is triggered to run etcd bootstrap

Author: is it correct change, we should have only one `init` node?

> Node with type `init` can be replaced with `controlplane` node which is triggered to run etcd bootstrap

Reviewer: Ah, okay so maybe `A node with type `init` can be replaced with a `controlplane` node which is triggered to run etcd bootstrap`

with `talosctl --nodes <IP> boostrap` command.

Use of `init` type nodes is discouraged, as it might lead to split-brain scenario if one node in
existing cluster is reinstalled while config type is still `init`.

It is critical to make sure only one control plane runs in bootstrap mode (either with node type `init` or

> via boostrap API/`talosctl bootstrap`), as having more than node in boostrap mode leads to split-brain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
via boostrap API/`talosctl bootstrap`), as having more than node in bootstrap mode leads to split-brain
```

Reviewer: there's actually a bunch of `boostrap`s to fix. I do this one all the time too :man_facepalming:

scenario (multiple etcd clusters are built instead of a single cluster).

### What is special about control plane node

Control plane nodes in Talos run `etcd` which provides data store for Kubernetes and Kubernetes control plane
components (`kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager` and `kube-scheduler`).

Control plane nodes are tainted by default to prevent workloads from being scheduled to control plane nodes.

### How many control plane nodes should be deployed

With a single control plane node, cluster is not HA: if that single node experiences hardware failure, cluster
control plane is broken and can't be recovered.

> Single control plane node clusters are still used as test clusters, in edge deployments, but it should be noted that this setup is not HA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Single control plane node clusters are still used as test clusters and in edge deployments, but it should be noted that this setup is not HA.
```

each other using control plane endpoint.

### kubelet is not running on control plane node

Service `kubelet` should be running on control plane node as soon as networking is configured:

```bash
$ talosctl -n IP service kubelet
NODE     172.20.0.2
ID       kubelet
STATE    Running
HEALTH   OK
EVENTS   [Running]: Health check successful (2m54s ago)
         [Running]: Health check failed: Get "http://127.0.0.1:10248/healthz": dial tcp 127.0.0.1:10248: connect: connection refused (3m4s ago)
         [Running]: Started task kubelet (PID 2334) for container kubelet (3m6s ago)
         [Preparing]: Creating service runner (3m6s ago)
         [Preparing]: Running pre state (3m15s ago)
         [Waiting]: Waiting for service "timed" to be "up" (3m15s ago)
         [Waiting]: Waiting for service "cri" to be "up", service "timed" to be "up" (3m16s ago)
         [Waiting]: Waiting for service "cri" to be "up", service "networkd" to be "up", service "timed" to be "up" (3m18s ago)
```

If `kubelet` is not running, it might be caused by wrong configuration, check `kubelet` logs
with `talosctl logs`:

```bash

> $ talosctl -n IP logs kubelet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ talosctl -n <IP> logs kubelet
```

Reviewer: We should probably surround all of these IPs with the brackets to make it clear the user needs to substitute something.

```

Initially `kube-apiserver` component is not running yet, and it takes some time before it becomes fully up
during bootstrap (image should be pulled from the Internet, etc.)
Once control plane endpoint is up Talos should proceed.

If Talos doesn't proceed further, it might be a configuration issue.

In any case, status of control plane components can be checked with `talosctl containers -k`:

```bash
$ talosctl -n IP containers --kubernetes
NODE         NAMESPACE   ID                                                                                      IMAGE                                        PID    STATUS
172.20.0.2   k8s.io      kube-system/kube-apiserver-talos-default-master-1                                       k8s.gcr.io/pause:3.2                         2539   SANDBOX_READY
172.20.0.2   k8s.io      └─ kube-system/kube-apiserver-talos-default-master-1:kube-apiserver                     k8s.gcr.io/kube-apiserver:v1.20.4            2572   CONTAINER_RUNNING
```

If `kube-apiserver` shows as `CONTAINER_EXITED`, it might have exited due to configuration error.

> Logs can be checked with `taloctl logs --kubernetes`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logs can be checked with `taloctl logs --kubernetes` (or with `-k` as a shorthand):
```

```

### Talos prints error `node not ready`

Node in Kubernetes is marked as `Ready` once CNI is up.
It takes a minute or two for the CNI images to be pulled and for the CNI to start.
If the node is stuck in this state for too long, check CNI pods and logs with `kubectl`, usually
CNI resources are created in `kube-system` namespace.
For example, for Talos default Flannel CNI:

```bash
$ kubectl -n kube-system get pods
NAME                                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
...
kube-flannel-25drx                               1/1     Running   0          23m
kube-flannel-8lmb6                               1/1     Running   0          23m
kube-flannel-gl7nx                               1/1     Running   0          23m
kube-flannel-jknt9                               1/1     Running   0          23m
...
```

### Talos prints error `x509: certificate signed by unknown authority`

Full error might look like:

```bash
x509: certificate signed by unknown authority (possiby because of crypto/rsa: verification error" while trying to verify candidate authority certificate "kubernetes"
```

> Most probably control plane endpoint points to a different cluster, as client certificate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commonly, the control plane endpoint points to a different cluster, as the client certificate
```
